It doesn't always work with me, but this feeling that you can get ahead of yourself.
I always like to get ahead of myself.
I don't like to set myself a target which I know I can't with.
I like to feel I'm well ahead and well out.
I tend to do by the week rather than by the day.
Really?
And do you actually measure it in terms of physical output?
Well, by the time my secretary types it, she's got it on the old computer.
She can tell me, you know, how many I've done.
I know roughly, you know, how many I've done.
So do you write by longhand?
I write hardly by longhand, but also I've got a very old, um, portable typewriter.
Uh-huh.
It's electric, um, and I love it.
I can't cope with things with, I'm afraid, with a lot of technology.
And, um, I just wonder what I should do when it finally, you know, gives up, because I like that.
I don't want, I don't want
I don't want it very much on the screen.
It's awfully difficult when you get used to these things, but of course she does it on the work process when it goes on the screen.
I mean, last of all, it goes on to somebody who professionally puts it on the disc.
So that's fine.
But I love writing by hand, and, you know, I will dash away on this.
And then I dictate it on the tape.
You dictate your writing?
Yes, but I do it first, and then I dictate it onto tape.
I find that very hard to believe, because the writing is so clean and so smooth.
Your writing is so clean and so smooth, and it surprises me that you're able to do that.
But I don't do the original dictating.
I write it by hand, or I type it.
Now, my writing is so bad and so poor, especially when I'm trying to go fast, that I couldn't give it to anybody to type.
I could hardly read it myself.
So when I've done it, I will then dictate it from that onto text while I can still read it.
And then my secretary will type it back.
And then that's the first draft, in a way.
And then I'll amend that.
How carefully do you plot these stories?
Oh, very.
Very.
Yes.
What's interesting, of course, is that however carefully I plot it, and I do plot it in huge detail, the book always alters during the writing.
Well, you find that with your work, don't you?
I mean, you may know, you think that's going to go.
And it's wonderful, because sometimes, you know, one gets these wonderful excitements.
Well, you as a writer will know that, you know, something you never thought of yourself.
Ideas, inspirations, ways that change things.
that you haven't planned, that just occurred during the actual writing of the book.
It's so funny, because I write nonfiction.
So I have to turn in, I have to submit a proposal for my book.
And what's so amusing is I've gone back and read the proposal for my book, which was 638 pages.
And it's amazing, the best chapters in that book weren't even in a proposal.
And the book I'm working on now, the things that I'm so enthused about, and so engaged in it.
weren't in the proposal at all.
I've gone up on tangents that I never expected.
I can absolutely understand that.
And things that I thought were really going to be important,
are boring me now.
Because the more I learn about it, I say, this is really not so interesting.
But this is fascinating.
Yes, yes.
Absolutely.
And you can wake up in the morning and think, ah, there's an idea.
And the more you pursue it, the more fascinating it becomes.
So you throw something overboard because this new road that you're going down is so fascinating.
Absolutely.
So that happens.
You know, the control, to an extent, is still there, has to be, because it's such a structured form.
Such a structured form, yes.
A detective story is, I mean, not going to change, for example, the identity of the victim or the identity of the killer, but nevertheless, ideas come during the writing.
And the book does change.
I never quite get the book I thought I was going to write.
And you don't get the book you thought you were going to write, do you?
Not at all.
That's what's so interesting.
In fact, I'm in the process now of changing my subtitle.
I think the title stays the same, but I like to basically summarize my book in my subtitle.
And I'm changing it now because it's taking a different perspective.
But I have to say with this book, because without giving anything away at all, because I'm pretty good at figuring out who done it.
And you got me here.
I thought I had it three times.
I said, I've got it now.
This is easy.
It's not easy.
She's got another trick up her sleeve.
And that's why I'm actually applauding.
I mean, do you have these various layers of responsibility?
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
A culpability, I guess, is probably the word.
Yes.
Writing, of course, are also layers of motivation.
You're going to have your suspect that you could have done it, and then you have to have a situation in which your reader can reason out, yes, I think she is guilty, but on the other hand, how could she be there, or, you know, that's not possible, and so forth.
I'm not sure how many people read in that way, of course.
I think a lot read just for the story and the characters.
I feel it's very important that the mystery is credible, that there is a mystery.
That's why people who obviously read it, you read it, looking at clues and following the clues.
The game for me is, I want to figure this thing out.
And I know that we've discussed this before.
You believe in abiding by the conventions.
Oh, absolutely.
Yes, I do.
You have to give the reader a fair shot.
I've got to give the reader a fair shot, yes.
And of course you can get the sort of situation when we...
Well, I mean, obviously one doesn't want to gain more people who haven't read it, but sort of rather intriguing clues when you've got the situation of the murderer come in in the morning with his Macintosh over his arm.
The feeling is that he's conceding something, he's bringing something in.
But of course what he was conceding was the fact that he wasn't bringing something in.
He wasn't conceding the presence of something, he was conceding the absence of something, the absence of his briefcase.
I was pondering that as I went along, and then I said, no, no, but I hadn't realized that it was the absence of these things.
Yes, yes.
Do you do a chart?
Do you chart these things?
I do.
Yes, I do.
I have a chart where everybody is at the relevant time.
Timing is always a great problem with me.
The timeline is exactly where everybody is.
Timing, timing, absolutely.
What can people do in the time?
Where were they?
And, of course, the complication is where they were, an actual fact in your book, and where, of course, they told the police they were.
Yes, but it's interesting how the new clues come as you write.
I don't know.
But they do.
They do.
They're fascinating to write.
Detective stories are fascinating to write.
That's why I love writing.
We all know about your background earlier and how you became interested in forensics and things like that.
But I still have the sense there are a lot of sophisticated things here that you had to do a lot of research.
A lot.
Absolutely.
A great deal of research.
I mean, I was fascinated to begin with the contrast between the order and the dignity and hierarchy and tradition of the criminal law.
In fact, all the law, but I was thinking, of course, of the criminal law, and the great courtesy with which
you know, a criminal trial is conducted, and the appalling events which give rise to them, between, you know, the matters which the lawyers deal with, and these wonderful chambers, of course, in the Middle Temple, and the, you know, Inner Temple's where Lincoln's in.
Could the American audience explain what chambers are?
That's law office, right?
Is that what it means?
Yeah, the chambers of the offices.
How it's organized is a very, very odd system.
I mean, I think I ought to, in talking to this, explain to Americans that we have two kinds of lawyers.
It's not very rational, it's grown up like that.
We have lawyers who are called solicitors.
They do practically every business in law.
But then we have barristers, and it's barristers who appear in the high court before the judge or the jury.
And it's the barristers who wear the wigs.
The barristers take special training, apart from their law degrees, and they are required to join one of the inns of court, which are medieval inns of court, and eat their dinners in these great halls.
And then they are called to the bar, go before the Lord Chancellor, dressed in astonishing... So this is when you make the transition from solicitor to barrister, when you call to the silk.
Now, a silk.
A silk, yes.
You wouldn't necessarily...
But you wouldn't necessarily make a transition from solicitor to barrister.
An awful lot of lawyers don't aspire or want to be barristers.
They want to be solicitors.
Solicitors would deal with all the everyday legal business.
And also things like conveyances and agreements and deeds.
You know, they have a different kind of training, exactly.
Contracts.
Yes, exactly.
And the work for the barristers comes through the solicitors.
In other words, you know, if somebody
malign me, if somebody libeled me, I don't go straight to a barrister, I can't.
I go to my solicitor, and he says, well, we can take a counter's opinion, we can take a barrister's opinion, and if I go to court, a barrister, not my solicitor, probably, well... A comparable comparison might be...
You go to a general practitioner, a doctor, to see how you're feeling.
Absolutely right.
And if there's a specific problem, he will send you to a specialist.
You're absolutely right.
That's a very, very good analogy.
And it's also a good analogy in that
people who are general practitioners are not seeing themselves as being on their way to being specialists.
If they're in hospital, they may be seeing their way to qualify to become parents and all kinds of surgeons or physicians.
But the general practitioners, general practitioners, because that's the kind of medicine he wants to do, and that's the kind of medicine he does.
And he's looking for symptoms and things like that.
And then when he's in over his head, he sends you off to his specialist.
Absolutely.
So that is it.
So the ones who appear before the judges are the barristers.
And when a barrister is senior,
and very well thought of within the law, then you can be made what's called a queen's council, or if we had a king, it would be a king's council, a QC.
One of Her Majesty's councils learned in the law, which has some great things, and they go before the Lord Chancellor and make QCs.
And those are the senior barristers.
You pay far more if you want a QC.
And of course, a QC, it's like all these people.
You've got strong trade unions, really.
If you want a QC to represent you in court, you want to pay in court without what's called a junior, an ordinary person.
So you pay an awful lot for QC, pay double fees.
And QC is especially not in criminal law, but in the other law, other kinds of law to do with divorce, libel, commercial law, international law.
Civil law.
Fantastic thing.
Fantastic things.
Which is why the top position in this particular chamber was the most public.
Well, yes.
The thing is, it's so complex really because... Anyway, those are the barrister's and those are the senior barrister's so-called accusers.
Now, the longest-serving barrister's officers are called chambers.
And they have an arrangement by which they are tenants of chambers.
In other words, you get chambers.
They don't operate as chambers, as one set of chambers within chambers.
They are tenants of that chamber.
And they, therefore, are independent practitioners.
If you and I were barristers and we were in the same chamber, you could be on one side and I could be on the other in the same case.
Really?
Oh, see, that would never happen here.
Well, it would never happen.
Absolutely.
In fact, the firm, what we call a law firm, would say, we can't handle this as a conflict.
No, no.
You get, oh yes.
Well, you get that with solicitors.
You never have, if you're buying a house, you don't have the same solicitors.
You'll disagree, we don't have the same solicitors.
But once you get, you certainly wouldn't both use the same banister, but your banister, opposing banister, may well be part of chamber, the same chamber.
Because they're independent practitioners.
But the most senior one is the head of chambers.
And most judges would have been head of chambers.
And people talk about being in Lord Lester's chambers, or Mr. Monckton's chambers, or Mr. Alastair's chambers, and that's the head of chambers.
Let's talk a little bit about... I took an awful lot of research.
I knew that, but there were lots of minutiae that I did.
But the research, just in terms of investigative stuff, and pathology, and the DNA testing that you mentioned here, I believe you mentioned... I mean, this is all new stuff.
This stuff, isn't it?
DNA is made a huge difference, of course.
Of course.
We just had a case here in Boston overnight, a horrible, heartbreaking story of a young girl who disappeared 12 years ago when she was 9 years old, walking.
And it was a terrible story.
And then they found a bone fragment, a skull fragment, just a couple weeks ago.
in the woods, and just this morning they announced that DNA testing confirms that that fragment is the girl's.
Just having found one piece of a bone... It's made such a difference.
It's made a difference to forensic work, and because it's made a difference to crime writing.
I mean, any crime writer, for example, any crime writer who had a situation in which there were blood stains or body stains, and didn't make it plain that, given that, the police would
you know, get a DNA profile and be able to go around testing people.
You know, I mean, the ordinary public know about these things now, don't they?
I mean, DNA is quite astonishing.
It is, and they're very sophisticated on, you know, how telling the evidence is.
Oh, yeah.
In the Simpson case, everybody knew that he did it.
I know.
How could anybody be on their jury and look at that evidence?
But there were other factors that went into that.
But I think that...
The reason this man is a pariah now is because it was so obvious.
The evidence was so overwhelming.
I'm glad he is a pariah.
And I'm glad they took that civil case.
And which really proved... I mean, of course, I can see... I mean, it seemed to me... I can see the whole world of grossness kind of justice.
But one can see what happened.
A, it seemed to me that the prosecution was less able than it should be.
But B, against that...
I mean, if I'd been a black jury woman, would I want to go back to my black neighborhood having convicted?
They weren't going to do it.
They hadn't even got the sense to stay out a day or two and pretend they were considering it, hadn't they?
They were there for months, a million hours.
That's why you go back and remember the judge coming in and saying, I'm going to have a mutiny on my hand.
These jurors want this thing to end.
The reason is they'd already made up their minds.
They didn't need a nine-month trial.
They already knew how they were going to vote.
They already made that decision.
And they didn't even consider the evidence.
That was horrible.
But anyway, I hate to get going on with J. Simpson.
But I have to say, I have a sense that this novel was a particular challenge for you.
Because structurally, you tell us in the first sentence who the victim is.
And then even, you know, I have to say, she generates, some of the reviewers say, a detestable character.
I don't think so.
I respected her.
I liked her.
I said, I like this woman.
What's wrong with this woman?
You offended me.
I mean, she is difficult.
She is in many ways.
I'm happy.
She's an achiever.
I can't see why people say she's so despicable.
I don't see that at all.
What does she do that's despicable?
And also, because what is so important to me as a woman is to show why she was as she was, how she became what she was.
I mean, she's the only child of a sadistic schoolmaster.
You're not going to like men.
She's fighting her way up in a very male world, and of course as one of those world, as a colleague said too, as far as her daughter was concerned, she would have been a very good mother of a brilliant, ambitious and beautiful daughter, but that wasn't the kind she got.
The daughter was not very loving.
She wasn't loving to the daughter, the daughter wasn't loving to her, that was a disaster.
Do you see what's become of Octavia, by the way?
In your mind.
And these are some questions I want to get to.
The things that you don't tell the reader.
I want to discuss that about Commander d'Alglige, too, because I'd like to know what you know about him that you never tell us.
Things that you, as the creator, have to know about him.
There must be so many things about him that you know that you never tell the reader, but it's important that you know things about him.
Maybe that's not the case.
And I'm not asking you to give me a biography of it here, but I guess maybe we should respond to that.
I think to an extent that's certainly true.
I've left that, of course, over the years of the books.
I've told an awful lot about him.
I mean, I think it was quite a lot about his childhood and the rectory and all sorts of things from his childhood come up at odd times, don't they?
They do.
We don't know much about his current love life that's shrouded in difficulty.
It's difficult to think he's actually living as a celibate.
I don't think he is, but that's sort of his business at the moment.
You don't think he is?
I doubt it very much.
I must say, I do occasionally feel I ought to get that man married.
I think he should.
But, uh, Kate, and I love the relationship with Kate, because... Yes, I think he's very, very fond of Kate, and she's a little in love with him, there's no doubt that that.
I think he's always sir to her.
Oh, yes, always sir.
And there is this professional... Oh, yes, absolutely there.
And I thought it was sort of interesting in this book, for the first time, Kate, from her back then...
is beginning to feel slightly different than Ronda's, because she feels where these two men are concerned, Daryl Gleesha Pierce, that there's an attitude to the job, kind of masculine comradeship somehow, from which she's subtly excluded.
Now she isn't, because Daryl Gleesha doesn't operate like that.
But she's the better shot, isn't she?
She's a better shot.
Why didn't you let me shoot?
I will bet that's the kind of thing that came to you in the process of writing the book.
That's right.
And also in the process of the last scene when she's in
in the hospital and that came to me during the writing of the book that Kate could have been actually brought up in that same book of facts because I wanted to emphasize you know we don't know what makes a psychopath here you have two people with massive upbringing really
loveless and deprived, and one becomes an ambitious, successful policewoman, and the other becomes a psychopath.
Why?
We don't know.
It's a roll of the dice, isn't it?
But that, so that bit came in.
And of course there, we need to talk about what came about Taylor.
There, Kate, who's the kind of woman she is, was sort of more or less saying, you know, finish your education, get a life, I had a career, you know, you've got health, you've got money.
I mean, she even said, Dr. October said that Ash hadn't got
a chance.
Kate says, you know, he has intelligence, he has strength, you know.
He has a chance.
None of this will get into the piece, by the way, because this really gets too deep into the story, and it does kind of give some of it away.
Although we certainly know that Ash is involved to some degree, but...
There's Octavia saying, I know he wouldn't cut my throat.
She says, Octavia, he did catch your throat.
He never, exactly.
And also, you see, I think that's exactly what he's doing.
God, I wonder what he was doing.
And also, when he made the fire.
I love that.
Kate is so, and when Ash liked the fire, liked that bit solidly, sort of putting that fire together so carefully.
And of course, she thinks, you know, he felt pity for me.
He knew I was cold.
He wanted to warm me.
And Kate knows that he was deliberately setting up a signal.
Because he knew it was over.
He knew it was over, and he was going to go out and take the girl with him.
That's right.
Once he killed that guy.
Yeah.
The guy that came up on the bike.
The only guy for whom he'd really felt any affection, actually.
Yeah.
That's interesting.
And that's one of these untold little stories.
It's one of those untold stories.
That's one of those little v-nets that kind of comes in and really leave us.
Yes.
One of the...
lawyers that I spoke to.
He was concerned with mental health cases.
I suppose with people appealing against detention of the mental health acts and things of that sort.
And there were a lot of psychopaths.
And he said, now, with Ash, if he had married Octavia, do you think love would have changed him, her love would have changed him?
And I said, no.
And he said, no, that's right, it wouldn't.
A psychopath is a psychopath.
And what he would have done is, there's a wonderful phrase that was used for a book called a decent interval.
The decent interval between the time the Vietnam War ended and when the North Vietnamese came down and took over.
They gave a decent interval of two years.
He would have given a decent interval from the time he married her to...
until the time he got all of the wealth squared away, all the ducks lined up, as we say, and then he would have killed her.
Yes, he would have done it.
And without anything, because that's what a psychopath does.
But I want to talk about, I almost feel that this is really a demonstration of such tremendous confidence in your part as a writer.
To start right away, we know totally who the victim is.
You give us half a dozen suspects.
Yes.
one after the other.
Here they are.
Take your pick.
Absolutely.
You tell me which one it was.
It's almost like a challenge, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
Is it throwing down a gun?
Yes, I suppose it is like that in a way.
I'm not sure I thought of it quite in those terms when I was doing it.
I felt, you know, here I've got my victim.
This is what made the sort of woman she was.
These are the members of James.
These are the circles that she lives.
Friends, lover, colleagues, and
Each of them, really, has some reason to dislike or fear her from here.
I'm telling you who they are.
I'm telling you why they dislike or fear her.
So really, in a sense, you're right.
They are lined up.
And the reason is one of them is going to kill her.
One of them is going to kill her.
Well, this is not for the piece, but actually two of them.
Well, actually three of them might very well have killed her.
Certainly the woman, the housekeeper.
Yes, absolutely.
She was definitely there to do something.
Absolutely.
She wasn't there to kill her.
She was there to humiliate her, to make her feel her own pain.
She was, yes.
I think the thing is that... You don't think she sees homicide in her... No, but this is one of the few books I think I've written, and only one other one, in which at the end we don't get an arrest, because what?
The other people quipped on it.
They could.
The woman could have done it.
The woman is dead.
I think he says that.
Ash could have done it.
Well, Ash is extremely unlikely to think of.
Ash could have got into the temple.
But nevertheless, Ash is dead.
And Ash is known to be a murderer.
And if the case had come to court, the defense would have said, well, look.
How can you see?
So this is a case in which we know who did it.
We know who did it.
It's never going to come to court.
That's right.
So that's why he has to go in on that final scene and tell the man, look,
I know.
I can't solve this case, but I know you did.
And then the man says he likes that.
He says, well, let's say, this is a fictional thing, of course, but let's just say he knows where he's standing, but he wants to tell Gleeson to have the satisfaction of knowing.
He does.
And he knows he's safe.
Because even if Douglas arrested him, he would say, I was putting forward a hypothesis, showing how I could have done it.
And I, if you want to, can put forward a hypothesis to show how Mrs. Carpenter could have done it.
And Mrs. Carpenter is dead.
Mrs. Carpenter could have stabbed and then put the blood on.
You do work within the conventions of a genre.
But I think one of the things, one of the qualities of critics like myself, these are novels.
I hope so.
That's what I'm talking about.
That's why I say you do kind of, you abide by the conventions on the one hand, but on the other hand you say, I want to do something a little different here.
Here's our victim straight away.
You're going to like this victim.
I like her.
This is not a totally despicable person.
Where these people are coming up with that, I never know.
And I have to tell you, I really injected some of these notes, by the way, because I do think they almost tell you too much.
They take away a little bit of the stuff.
I don't know.
I like to be totally surprised.
I never read these things, I have to say, anyway.
I'm trying to sort of, I suppose, stretch the conventions, trying to work within them, turn them around, twist them.
See, I know the detective story is an artificial form of writing, but all novels are artificial forms of writing.
In every single novel, the writer is using the stuff of his imagination, his compulsions, to put them in an orderly and compelling form, isn't it?
It is an artificial form.
Well, of course it is.
Another very interesting thing, which I'm going to say it now so I can have it on the tape.
We know more about this woman, the victim, in death through your presentation of the various suspects.
What we learn about their relationship with her almost illumines her life more.
It fleshes out another aspect of her life in death.
much more than we ever knew.
Yes, well, you're a very perceptive reader, of course.
I think why you get sort of really irritated by some people's reactions is that not everybody reads novels with a kind of perception you'll read them with.
They read them with the far more goodies and the baddies, and I don't know, but he's good and he's bad and so on.
But this is true, and their reactions to her after she's dead.
And the way in which, and it's rather sad, she has seen always a delvish when he asks, what was she like, trying to find what she's like.
He always gets to say she was a very fine lawyer.
She wasn't sort of seen to me, she wasn't sort of seen in any other terms, very by many of her colleagues.
And then they say, well, that's what she would have liked to be remembered by, because that was the most important thing about her.
It was very important, of course, to several of these people that you die without pain.
Yes.
Yes, it was, yes.
And who asked that question?
It was very interesting.
The woman who put the... Yes, yes.
Who put the words on her hand.
Yes, yes.
Who didn't know, of course, at that time that she'd been murdered.
And that's why... That was very clever of you, because that took her out of my cast of suspects.
Well, very rightly.
You see, very rightly.
Because she didn't know.
No, she didn't know, very rightly.
And from the point of view, actually, of the construction of the novel and the research, that was quite tricky, because I had to find a way of killing her.
which would mean that she could be there just sitting, as if she'd had a heart attack.
I was going to have a stomp in the throat, you see, and there's lots of notes of things in which people say, no, no, and my medical thing said, no, no, you couldn't get that around bleeding, or very unlikely, you'd have to be stabbed somewhere from the back, which might be wrong.
So you had to talk to... You had to... You, Phyllis Dames, had to talk to professionals and say, where can I stab her so there will be very little blood?
She'll be innocent to use that, but really very little blood.
And then say, well, it really would have to be stabbed apart.
But that would preclude tremendous amounts of blood from coming out?
Well, if it was a very thin thing, it went straight into the heart.
The sort of wound would close up from afterwards.
You might get a little oozing, but you wouldn't get...
The bleeding would all be internal.
So did you have just the mechanics of the murder first, and then you had to fit the technical aspects?
No, I knew that I wanted her to be murdered.
But after that, it had to be, well, if I'm going to have Mrs. Tunder putting the wig on,
finding her dead.
It's got to be that she feels that it's just a heart attack.
And I even meant that me and Mrs. Carpenter's husband, we just told Catherine, he died from a heart attack.
Mrs. Carpenter's not surprised to mind being dead, she assumes his heart attack.
And her reaction is just, my God, she's escaped me.
You know, I wanted a baby.
I didn't get my satisfaction.
I never got my satisfaction.
But she put on the wake of her life.
We had to.
It had to be, the wigs certainly had to put one.
Somebody knew where the wig was, who knew the blood was there.
But that need necessarily be the person who actually put it.
Where did you come up with the idea of the man getting his own blood and putting it in a refrigerator?
Well, I suppose everything you sort of read, casually read, over years,
Somehow it's filed away in the imagination, actually, and some services when it's wanted.
And I have certainly read over the years quite a lot of instances, once AIDS started, of people who had to go into hospitals for operations.
Of course.
And it's quite the thing, you know, you take in your own blood.
I mean, you give the blood over a period of time.
And then you know the blood you're getting.
A is your blood.
So where do you know it's a perfect mix?
B, you know that you're... You see, we have had these people who've been given A.
And nothing more awful.
Can you imagine it?
Can you imagine it more awful?
And this man, you see, I made him a hypocritic, you see.
He's exactly, he's not going in for a very major operation, but he may need to have to have.
And so, right.
And one of the doctors said, well, normally, and I did all the medical research.
I said, well, where would this guy be taken?
I said, normally, at hospital stores there.
I said, he doesn't want it stored at hospital.
He wants to make sure that it's his blood.
So they said, yes, the GP could take it, and an anticoagulant would be put in it, and it would be perfectly all right to store it in the fridge.
And they sent me the pouches, you see, because I... Who are you saying they?
These are medical people?
Yes, the doctor, yes.
It must take a great deal of pleasure in helping you with this.
Oh, they did.
They did.
Tremendous number of people who came to me with detail.
And also, the account of a post-mortem.
That was a post-mortem actually written for me by a chap who does post-mortems on that.
One of the reviewers, let's dispense with this pretty quickly.
One of the reviewers suggests, it might even be the New York Times reviewer, that you may be getting bored with Commander Dalgleish.
Maybe that's why he doesn't come in for 110 pages or so, and that maybe you're preparing for a new generation of detectives, or maybe you're preparing to retire him to the past.
No, not... Did you respond to that?
Well, yes, I think this... You see, people tend to think this because they feel he's not there throughout the book in a very prominent position.
But, of course, he can't be there until the murder takes place.
The television adaptation, of course, he will be, simply because television will trivialise it.
and they'll take the view that everybody's going to see the star at the beginning, and the star somehow or another will be got in at the beginning, however much the book is distorted to do that.
But, I mean, trying to write a really realistic novel, wanting to set up the whole situation, wanting to show the past life of Venetia, none of the priests can be there, so he isn't going to come.
But when he does come, he is there, actually, at all the important parts.
He's there when the body's discovered.
He's the one who goes with his colleagues,
He's the one who interviews most of the prime suspects.
He's the one who goes down and interviews the wife, the ex-wife, ex-husband of Venetia.
and his new wife in the country.
And that gives him the truth.
He goes and has to look at the ocean.
That was a crucial visit.
He is the one who goes to see Mrs. Carpenter.
She's the one that finds that body and investigates that.
He's the one who goes to the church.
Certainly his subordinates go and see the woman who keeps the agency without him.
But on the whole, I don't think there's a major bit of police investigation in that book, but at least she's a person.
the things that he doesn't like.
If things aren't brought to his attention that's going on in some of these other investigations, here's something that they didn't need to tell him about something.
And he said, he said, Pierce, when you get a piece of information like this, I want it immediately.
He's there, I mean, when they get together to review things, you're here, and he's there.
So he's actually wants the investigation.
He's there as much as any of the other people.
He's commanding.
And he's commanding, and he's there.
But if I were, sort of, to spend far more time with him, then I wouldn't have the, what I think is quite interesting relationship between Kate and him, or Kate and Pierce.
And, you know, we wouldn't be able to investigate in as much detail the other characters.
They're just as important to me.
The suspects, for example, are the sort of people they are, their reactions.
Do you, in your mind, know any of his poetry?
Well, I wrote a little bit of it for one of the second books, yes, yes I do.
No, and I wrote two poems for him for the television of Original Sin.
They used the one that was the, I thought, the less good of the two.
I suppose it was the easiest one for them to speak.
But otherwise I haven't put much poetry in.
I think probably I have to put some poetry in.
But I mean, in your mind, you know what kind of a poet he is.
Yes, I know what kind of poet he is, yes.
Oh, he's very good.
Yes, he's a very good poet.
It's interesting, really, actually, because I think when I look at the character that I've created, I wanted him to have a very strong, well, very strong artistic interest.
I just thought that would make him a more complex, interesting human being.
I have a feeling that he would be most likely to be a musician.
I think he's got a musician's mind.
But you see, I don't know enough about music to make that credible.
He obviously wouldn't be a painter.
You can't see him setting up an eagle with an investigation.
But I think he might well have been.
very fond of music and know a lot about music and maybe paid one extra.
He's been around now for about 20 years?
Oh yeah, a very long time, yeah.
Is he ageing in real time?
No, lucky man.
He's a perpetual late middle-aged old middle-aged and the unluckiest creator.
Oh, God, lucky fellow.
He doesn't raise him.
So he's about 50, maybe?
Probably late 40s.
Really?
Yes, at least, late 40s.
Oh, he must be quite a charming man.
Oh, yes, he is.
Quite an interesting person.
He's right.
But I couldn't say, I couldn't be so many of them.
But I never kind of put you speaking into the poet, W.H.
Orton.
love detective stories.
And he always had, we had the same publisher, so he always had a new piece.
Who is this now?
W. H. Orton.
Oh, I'm sorry, I missed that, go ahead.
Yeah, he loved detective stories.
He did.
In fact, he wrote a very interesting essay on the classical detective story called Guilty Vicarage.
I'll have to look it up.
Yes, he did.
In which he examined the detective story in relation to Christian theology.
But anyway, so he always got a copy of one of my books that was published, you see.
And we had the, he had a director of flavour and pericolus called Charles Montice.
And Charles said to me, you'll get wisdom.
to write some poetry for Dalgleish.
I thought this was a wonderful idea.
Then, unfortunately, Watson died.
That's a great stylist.
And I was terribly keen about that.
And I was terribly upset that that never happened.
Because, you see, I knew what would happen if it had happened.
And then we should have some reviewers saying, how very unwise of P.D.
James to attempt to write poetry for Dalgleish.
We can no longer believe that.
I should have said, shucks to you, that was dumbed away to all of them.
That would have been so wonderful.
I didn't interview with Doris Lessing.
Because she wrote a few novels under a nom du poom.
Yes, she did.
And the reason was to see what reaction people are going to say.
And she said the one that she liked the most was one woman who said, kind of reads like a young Doris Lessing.
She said, that was the best review.
Because otherwise they're saying, well, this is...
the name of the individual is often.
They're dismissing the author, or they're lionizing the author.
Absolutely.
And I often feel that with prizes like the Book of Priors.
The only way, really, you could judge best novel of the year is if you didn't know who wrote it.
But, of course, you can't do that.
Like a blind wine tasting.
Exactly, a blind wine tasting, because you can't do that.
I know, you can't do that.
Great idea.
But you do go to a novel with a preconception, don't you?
You do have a different view of it if you think it's going to be a Lessing or a Murder.
Or P.D.
James.
P.D.
But if it's something, it's not.
But, you see, I'm not sure.
It was almost totally ignored, wasn't it?
And then, of course, she said, that just shows.
you know, that you go by the name.
But then, of course, they were able to be taught, whether rightly or wrongly, yes, but we didn't think this was a particularly good novel, you know, isn't it a good lesson?
But I think she had a point.
It was a nice exercise.
A very clever exercise.
Is it fair to say, I mean, you're quite an unnervous reader, I think, is that a fact?
Do you read?
I read a lot, but I... How about in your younger years, did you read more?
Oh, yes, I read, I read, yeah, but I...
I'm not ashamed of this.
I don't read a great deal of modern fiction.
I'm not very knowledgeable about modern fiction.
As I get older, I'm reading far more autobiography and re-reading, which may be just part of age.
It's very common.
I'm having a chapter in my new book about people who have been shaped by their reading.
I've had interviews with Umberto Eppo and Maurice Sendak and Harold Bloom and Alfred Kays.
Have you ever heard of Tilly Olsen, a woman?
Yes, I have.
She's in the 80s now.
And I've been to her house and she has all these books that are literally falling apart from having been re-read, not read.
And what I find is that in myself, as we get a little older,
We go back to the, we find our greatest pleasure in re-reading, not so much in reading authors that we didn't grow up with, that really didn't help shape us as individuals.
That's very true with me, yes.
I go back to a lot of people.
And who in particular do you find yourself going back to?
Well, I can see in my own writing, absolutely, the influence of a rather diverse group who I would go back to.
For detective writing, it's certainly Dorothy L. Sayers, who, although these are now period novels, and she certainly has a very snobbish detective, was a detective writer who wrote well, and I think enlarged the genre.
Then it would be Graham Greene, Evelyn Wall, who I think is the greatest stylist of this generation.
And, of course, Jane Austen.
Jane Austen, I suppose, has influenced me profoundly about structure and irony.
Green Green on the aspect of the world, the religious aspect of it, also the crime novel.
And I think it's more just as a stylist.
You see echoes of these writers in your own life?
Oh, I can, yes, I can.
I mean, suddenly, not mindfully, but certainly in a very subtle way you see things like that.
Oh, I think so, yes.
I think I do.
And so, Corinna Dalgleish will be with us as long as you are capable to put words on paper.
As long as I can think of ideas that really excite me.
Really what happens is, I suppose I'm not a very professional writer in a way, but I don't finish a book with me, right, what will I do next?
I suppose in part of my mind I'm thinking that, but I wait until I get an idea that really excites me.
And in a few instances in recent years, you've gone off and done non-Dalgleish books.
Yes, because I had an idea that excited me and I needed to deal with it.
But I never think, oh, it is time I showed them I could do something different.
I never despise the craft that showed the story.
To me the honors, by the way, I think our time is running out, so I... May I put it to Nick?
I would be honored.
Here's my card, by the way, which you can take.
Do you like Nick or Nicholas?
I like Nicholas, but... Yeah, well, it's Nicholas's really nice name, isn't it?
It's nice, with an H. You know Nicholas Barker, one of the keeper of books at the British Library?
Yes, I do.
Not personally very much.
That's quite an interesting one.
I've enjoyed this.
Do you mind, by the way, if I take a photograph of you?
Not a bit.
I do have a number of customers who... This will be in 20 newspapers, by the way.
I have a small syndicate of newspapers around the country who take... This is a New Sterely.
I'm putting it with affection and admiration from the author.
This is going to be a flash, you'll see.
I took a picture of you while you were signing.
Thank you.
You can have that card if you'd like.
It was affection and admiration.
Your kind.
Which is very genuine.
Now if I can just have a picture of you.
Thank you.
Oh, I love it.
Okay, let's do that again.
Let me try another one.
I don't know if you want available right.
This is my new, I got this in the seatbelt.
This is a Contax.
This is a new state-of-the-art little miniature camera.
This is all professional quality.
This is the person who's at in the background.
That's nice.
There we go.
One more.
How about one more with a flash?
That's such a pretty smile.
Would you like me to send you any copies of these, if you'd like?
Yes, I would.
And great luck, my dear, I thought, well, I mean, you don't need to.
It's going to be a great success.
Why don't you just write an address here, a P.O.
box or something?
Oh, I'll put my number of address.
And that way I'll send you a copy of the story and I'll let you know where it's published.
It'll be published in about 20 of these papers.
My first book has got 60,000 copies in print.
And it's still in print after three years.
We're going into a seventh printing.
This is a $35 book, so that's a lot of books for, you know, that cost.
Your publisher must be delighted.
Well, and they only gave me a tiny little grant, so they threw up and made so much money.
And they earned out on the first day.
Then you earned out, and you're still getting.
On the first day, we had three printings in the first month of publication.
And, oh, it's really, it was wonderful, because it's stories.
I tell stories sometimes.
Maybe I'll, if you'd like, may I send you a copy?
Oh, I love a copy.
Will you describe it for me?
It's quite a nice book.
It's about... I love a copy.
Will you describe it for me?
May I?
For Phyllis.
Yes, please.
Absolutely.
Just a question now.
You're Baroness.
You might take your quarters off.
What is the proper way to address you formally?
Lady or Baroness?
Oh, yes.
Either is all right.
Baroness James or Lady James doesn't matter.
It doesn't really matter at all.
Some baronesses, just like the baroness, could be Lady James.
They could be the wife of a knight, the wife of a baron, the wife of a baroness, the wife of a baroness, the wife of a woman.
There's an American woman married high to a married Viscount Eccles.
Oh, yes, she's Viscountess.
She's Viscountess or a lady.
Exactly.
You could be Lady Eccles.
There it is.
The equivalent of being knighted?
Dave.
If I'd been the equivalent of a knight, I'd be Dave Phillips.
So that's where you use the Christian name as opposed to the surname.
That's the Christian name.
Dave Phillips, yes.